.TH OBSURACTL 1 "March 2026" "obsura-deploy" "Obsura Operator Commands"
.SH NAME
obsuractl \- operator CLI for an obsura-deploy checkout
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B obsuractl
.RB [ \-\-repo-root " PATH" ]
.RB [ \-\-color " {auto,always,never}" ]
.RB [ \-\-no-color ]
.RB [ \-\-version ]
.I <command>
.RI [ options ]
.PP
.B obsuractl
.I <command>
.B \-\-help
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B obsuractl
is a thin operator tool for the
.B obsura-deploy
repository. It wraps the documented Docker Compose and script workflows used to run released Obsura services.
.PP
It is not a control plane, not a monitoring backend, not a secret manager, and not a replacement for Docker Compose.
.SH REPOSITORY MODEL
.B obsuractl
operates on an
.B obsura-deploy
repository checkout.
.PP
The binary provides the command.
The repository checkout provides:
.IP \(bu 2
.B compose/
for stack definitions
.IP \(bu 2
.B env/
for operator-managed configuration
.IP \(bu 2
.B scripts/
for the wrapped deploy, update, backup, restore, and rollback workflows
.PP
Repository discovery rules:
.IP "1." 4
Search upward from the current working directory.
.IP "2." 4
Use
.B \-\-repo-root /path/to/obsura-deploy
if the checkout is elsewhere.
.IP "3." 4
Use
.B OBSURA_DEPLOY_ROOT=/path/to/obsura-deploy
for an environment-level override.
.SH QUICK START
.nf
obsuractl init --quickstart-local --image ghcr.io/obsura/obsura-api:<published-tag-or-digest>
obsuractl up local
.fi
.PP
On interactive terminals,
.B obsuractl init
can offer the same local quickstart and ask for the image reference.
.PP
For template files only:
.nf
obsuractl init --template-only
.fi
.PP
If you run the standalone binary from outside the repository:
.nf
obsuractl --repo-root /srv/obsura-deploy init --quickstart-local --image ghcr.io/obsura/obsura-api:<published-tag-or-digest>
obsuractl --repo-root /srv/obsura-deploy up local
.fi
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B init
Create missing
.B env/*.env
files from the committed example templates.
It can also prepare a local quickstart by writing
.B compose/local/docker-compose.yaml
and generating
.BR POSTGRES_PASSWORD .
.TP
.B doctor
Validate Docker, Docker Compose, env files, image references, and Compose wiring.
.TP
.B up
Start a named environment stack through the documented deploy workflow.
.TP
.B down
Stop a named environment stack and remove orphaned containers.
.TP
.B restart
Restart the whole stack or selected services.
.TP
.B status
Show container and service status using
.BR "docker compose ps" ,
then print the running API image summary when a container exists.
.TP
.B logs
Show logs for the whole stack or selected services.
.TP
.B update
Pull newer images and recreate the selected environment using the current image reference from the selected compose file.
The wrapped script waits for API health before returning success.
.TP
.B rollback
Write a reviewed image tag or digest into the selected compose file
and recreate the selected environment.
If the recreate step fails, the previous
.B image reference
is restored.
.TP
.B backup
Run the documented backup workflow for PostgreSQL and persistent app data.
.TP
.B restore
Run the documented restore workflow. This is destructive and requires
.BR \-\-yes .
The restore workflow prints backup metadata when present and waits for API health before reporting success.
.SH COLORS
On interactive terminals,
.B obsuractl
uses ANSI color by default for help output, status markers, and command hints.
.PP
Color controls:
.IP \(bu 2
.B \-\-color auto
Use color only when the output stream looks interactive.
.IP \(bu 2
.B \-\-color always
Force ANSI color output, useful on Linux when piping through tools that preserve escape sequences.
.IP \(bu 2
.B \-\-color never
Disable ANSI color output.
.IP \(bu 2
.B \-\-no-color
Shortcut for
.BR \-\-color " never" .
.IP \(bu 2
.B NO_COLOR=1
Disable color through the standard environment convention.
.SH EXAMPLES
.nf
obsuractl init --quickstart-local --image ghcr.io/obsura/obsura-api:<published-tag-or-digest>
obsuractl up local
obsuractl doctor local
obsuractl up production
obsuractl logs production api --follow
obsuractl backup production --output-dir /srv/backups/obsura/nightly-test
obsuractl rollback production --to-image ghcr.io/obsura/obsura-api@sha256:<digest>
obsuractl restore production backups/production/20260311-210000 --yes
.fi
.SH FILES
.TP
.B env/global.env
Global operator-managed values such as bind address, port, volume names, and backup root.
.TP
.B env/api.env
Application runtime values.
.TP
.B env/postgres.env
PostgreSQL runtime values.
.TP
.B compose/local/docker-compose.yaml
Local stack definition, including the local api image.
.TP
.B compose/production/docker-compose.yaml
Production-minded stack definition, including the production api image.
.TP
.B docs/cli.md
Extended markdown documentation.
.SH MANUAL OPERATION
Every
.B obsuractl
workflow has a manual equivalent. Examples:
.PP
.nf
bash scripts/deploy.sh production
bash scripts/update.sh production
bash scripts/backup.sh production
docker compose --env-file env/global.env --env-file env/postgres.env --env-file env/api.env -f compose/production/docker-compose.yaml ps
.fi
.PP
The repository remains usable without the CLI.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.B 0
means success.
.PP
.B 1
means the requested command failed validation or the wrapped command failed.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR docker (1),
.BR docker-compose (1)
.PP
Project documentation:
.B README.md
and
.BR docs/cli.md .
